# Introduction

As I am writing this, on a Saturday evening in the March of 2013, the Internet is not a new thing. In fact it has existed since 1982. But even after over 30 years William Gibson's quote still rings true:

> The future is already here - it's just not very evenly distributed.

Where some people have integrated the Internet as deeply into their lives as their ability to read or speak or sing, others have - for a plethora of different but mostly economic reasons - not even proper regular access to it. 

Uneven distribution of new technologies is really nothing new. After leaving their inventor's lab, many technologies tend to spread to the hands of certain elites: New technologies  are usually costly to build and maintain, especially if you yourself do not have all the skills necessary. So you end up having to pay some technician or other sort of expert as a maintainer, you need to obtain the required consumable supplies and last but certainly not least you have to have the time and leisure to even develop an interest into some technology the mainstream has not taken note of. After a while technology tends to become more affordable, the kinks get worked out, mass production starts and a short while later everybody has one of those fancy electrical freezers at home. 

Those processes of technology spreading to the masses can take a long time but the Internet took - after a slow start in the labs of a few scientists and universities as well as a few people in the military - the western world like a wildfire. Here in Germany it hit mainstream somewhere between the middle and the end of the 1990ies: Now, less than 20 years later the amount of people not pretty much constantly connected either with their personal or work computers, smart phones or tablet computers.

Still the spreading of the bare technology has not spread the Internet as evenly as it might look. The technology *is* in most people's hands but the Internet is not just a piece of electronic, a device. It is a phenomenon emerging from the use of technology, in a certain way you could say that the Internet is just what you make it by using it, a construction of your actions.

For some the Internet is a medium, a better television with more clips of cats that plays what you want when you want it. Others see the Internet as the replacement for the meters of printed encyclopedia that still filled living room shelves a few years ago, a way to quickly get a certain piece of information. The Internet is at the same time:

* a shopping mall
* an entertainment system
* the most complete library in the history of mankind
* a room for social interaction
* a living environment
* and infinitely more

None of these perceptions is *wrong*, given enough time and discussion you will probably not find two people seeing and using the Internet in exactly the same way. Each person's perception and conception is *right* … for *them*. 

Obviously Problems start bubbling up as soon as we try to form rules, laws or social conventions for the interactions online: The rules for a library are different from the rules for a shopping mall are different from the rules for rooms of social interactions. 

In the coming chapters I will try to define sort a few of the concepts and ideas necessary to develop a consistent understanding of the basic building block we are talking about when we speak about the Internet. We will use those definitions and concepts to derive a few basic principles and later rules for interacting with the Internet and the entities "inside" of it.

I won't lie to you, you might not like every idea I present and elaborate here. I will challenge a few of the so-called *truths* that we as a society have made ourselves comfortable with, will tell you that many of the things that certain authorities, activists or civil rights proponents have promised you really are impossible at best and a lie at worst. I see this book as an approach to bring some structure to the discussion that is currently being lead by different entities with completely different ideas about what the Internet actually is. Consider me a janitor: I am sweeping up the mess that other people have left and clean up the room so that it is useful again. 

In the beginning I talked about the emergence of the Internet. Instead of pretending that I know the birth date of the Internet by heart, that this network that permeates almost every aspect of my everyday life has become so important to me that I celebrate its coming into this world every year with cake and a party I will be honest: I paused writing to look up the exact fact. There, it's out. I went to Wikipedia[^wikipedia] to get the date, quickly scanned the full page[^wikiInternet] for the little tidbit of information I needed at that moment. And I will probably have forgotten it by tomorrow morning leaving me just with a lingering feeling of an idea of how old the Internet is.

I am telling you this rather trivial event not as an act of self-deprecation[^wikideprecation], not to try to get on your good side or to get you to sympathise with me - far from that actually. I am being very open with you because I don't want to pretent to be one of those omniscient old white man that seem to dominate our public discussions. If you are looking for someone cocksure of knowing all the answers to everything you might want to move on and look for one of those men who tend to be on every TV show and in every magazine preaching the gospel of their own wisdom. 

As much as I believe that I know a thing or two my experiences and the circumstances I live in form my perceptions. I will not claim to be able to capture everybody's history in these pages. The ideas I will write about tend to be rather abstract, shedding many of the different discourses that people are working on[^discourses]. Those discourses obviously do bleed into every observation of human behavior, in order to create a simpler, clearer model I will not focus on them though, that will be a task for a later time.

This book is a work in process. It always will be. And I like it that way. Because it means that we are still developing, learning, changing.

## The Title

If you are keeping score you might have noticed that even though the title of this book is "The Conditions of Sharing" I have not used the word *share* so far. Let me change that.

The author Cory Doctorow once said that the Internet is

> the world's most efficient copying machine

And he is not wrong from a mechanical standpoint. But as I was saying earlier: The Internet is really about what people do with it. And what people do to a large extend is sharing; the Internet is making each one of us a publisher. 

There have been many success stories of bloggers turning their passion into their livelihood, engineers quitting their job to put out their own pet projects, people crafting things in their own homes and selling them through platforms like Etsy to potentially thousands of customers all over the world. It's obvious how the Internet allowed them to share (and monetize) their passions, offers and works. 

But that is the home-shopping-channel vision of the Internet, a byproduct. What it provides to the individual is far more powerful and intense than cheap goods delivered to your doorstep: **Connectivity**.

Every little bit of information we put out there, every blog, every status update, every comment, every tweet makes us easier to connect to. You like this one edgy comic book artist that hardly anyone has heard of? There will be some sort of fan-forum, Facebook page or blog about her where you can find others interested in the same thing. You read an article by some scientist about a new theory you find interesting but you still have a question? Write an email and more often than not you will get an answer, start a conversation with the most brilliant minds from your living room couch (or the gym, or school or some nice bar in Paris).

Every bit about ourselves that we share can be connective. Not every connection is great as many have had to find out: Bullying, stalking, harassment are common online just as they are offline. But offline we have established social rules trying to soften the blow and online many of those rules seem to fail. The popular web comic Penny Arcade summed it up in 2004[^pafuckwad]:

> Normal Person + Anonymity + Audience = Total Fuckwad

There is the notion that the Internet makes people mean because it's anonymous, some feel that they can get away with everything. And we have seen so many cases of it that it rings true: It's the wild west all over again and the person shooting first wins. 

I believe that while this perspective is an obvious case of cultural pessimism[^cultpess] we cannot just cast those concerns aside. Social problems have a tendency not to dissolve but to become norms. So what we really have to develop is an understanding of how the Internet as a social space works, what underlaying laws form the space and how it enables certain behaviors.

In 1624 John Donne coined the phrase

> No man is an island

The truth of this statement has become very visible through the Internet enabling us human beings to act on a more global level. And so far we've not always proven to be our best. I believe that understanding the system Internet will help us to form better social contracts about interactions with each other, will enable each one of us to be more free in the expression of him- or herself. For this we need guidelines to live by. The conditions of sharing.

[^discourses]: I am thinking specifically about the topics of sexism, racism and currently existing problems with economic or social inequality
[^wikipedia]: https://www.wikipedia.org
[^wikiInternet]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Internet
[^wikideprecation]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Self-deprecation
[^spackeria]: a rough english translation would be "data-protection criticizing Spackeria" with "Spackeria" being a play on the word "Spacko" meaning something like idiot
[^GermanAngst]: Sadly there only is an entry in the German Wikipedia https://de.wikipedia.org/wiki/German_Angst. German Angst refers to an attitude based on the credo of technology mostly being bad for people (unless it's about cars, Germans love cars!)
[^irl]: "in real life"
[^pafuckwad]: http://www.penny-arcade.com/comic/2004/03/19
[^cultpess]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cultural_pessimism
